‘What is the Purpose of Our Life?’, Hampstead,
1.11.1983
Key Words and Phrases:
Purpose of life
confusion
government
norms/titles
political systems fail us (democracy, demonocracy,
communism)
Mother Earth and biological sustainers
living all-pervading force
Kundalini
Kali Yuga/Krita Yuga
Mohatma Ghandi/Christ – “manly men”
and compassion
‘born again’
charkas
integration
mental vs. emotional problems
Guru principle
checking vibrations
the nature of Mother’s work
General Content:
Science and our mental projections are not
connected to higher, living force, so they
fail us.
Biological movement within us is spiral, but
mental projections are linear, dead.
We must become scientists of the Divine, and
understand the knowledge of the roots.
We are all One; all of God’s children – no
nationalities exist.
You can find information about the Holy Ghost
in the Bible, but you must go to Indian scriptures
to find information about the ‘Adi Shakti’.
Doctors must learn about the three sides of
a human: physical, mental and emotional.
With Sahaja Yoga you can cure yourself and
others.
You cannot pay for Kundalini rising – if
you could, or did, it would no longer be benevolent.
Question Period Following Talk:
What happens to our Spirit after death?
Does self-realization interfere with normal
functioning?
Story of a woman with a serious heart problem.
Where does depression come from and can Sahaja
Yoga cure it?
Is meditation difficult?
What is the evidence of Shri Mataji’s own
enlightenment?
Self-Realization Exercise:
Shri Mataji finishes the talk by giving the
audience self-realization, and She comments
on left vishuddi guilt problems.
What is the purpose of our life? Is it that
the whole evolution is purposeless; that there
is no Divine play in it? Then why it was done
with such care, and why we have become human
beings? So first, we have to come to right
conclusions - that is the counseling you can
call it – we have come, we have to understand,
that we have not become what we are supposed
to be. That’s why we are in confusion. We
do not have answers for these fundamental
questions. Some believe in God, some don’t
believe in God. Some believe in Christ, some
believe in Mohammed. Some believe in Krishna,
some say that it’s all science. We are so
confused, and there is no answer to it. The
reason is we are not that what we have to
be.
Supposing an instrument is given to you, and
you don’t know anything about that. Then
you don’t know what is the purpose of that
instrument, and for which it was created,
and to what use it has to be put. Thus, there’s
a confusion, and the confusion is to such
an extent that in that confusion we have formed,
from ideas, mental projections. Artificial,
without any biological basis for it. There
is no biological basis for our mental projections.
Just sit down here, and think now, that see,
this kind of a government if you make, then
people will be alright. This is your own mental
projection. It has nothing living behind it;
it’s all dead thought. By changing the governments,
have you been able to transform the people?
I have been to Russia, I have been to China,
I have been to America, to all these places.
Human beings are just the same; there is no
difference whatsoever. Maybe some are more
honest, some are more dishonest, some are
more immoral, some are less immoral, but,
on the balance, if you see you find any kind
of person everywhere. So one has to understand
that this kind of mental projection that we
were having about other things like social
work, people think that being social work
and all that, our ego can be conquered. The
greatest egoistical people are the social
workers.
Now these mental projections have created
also lots of norms for us. Like, I sit down
here and decide I’ll give a title to someone.
Now he becomes a titlehood. Then he’s off,
finished, once for all he’s dead now to
anything that is reality because he’s living
with something so unreal, which was given
to him by somebody which is so unreal. There’s
nothing living force behind it. Have you seen
any man changing by getting some sort of a
title or lot of money? On the contrary he
becomes worse, never improves. So what is
the reason? Why is it that when we go into
an enterprise of this kind, why is it, we
find, that everything fails? You talk of democracy,
it becomes demonocracy. You talk of communism,
you find it is another headache. You talk
of anything, it all becomes such a funny thing,
and it recoils back (to you?). Whatever you
try, any enterprise, it recoils back. Science,
what is science now has become nothing but
atomic war. How is it science (wandered/wanted/come?)
into atomic war no one knows, but suddenly
it has become a great threat to the whole
world. Computers, tomorrow computers will
start dominating us. We see those things clearly
happening to us, and we are worried, we are
shocked. (But/Well?) we don’t know why is
it whatever we try to do, why, it recoils
on us, and entangles us, and enslaves us.
The reason is it’s, it has no living force
behind it. It’s only mental, at mental level,
and human beings live only on mental level.
So there has to be another higher level which
is generated when you get in contact with
a living force. Now let us see what is that
living force. The living force is that which
sprouts the seed. The Mother earth sprouts
the seed. If you see the Mother Earth as it
is, you don’t find anything in it, nothing.
There’s just clay. But you put some seed
and that wasteful thing that you think of
no use, this mud, that gives that life to
the seed, and you find that the flowers become
fruits, automatically. It’s a wondrous world,
if you start looking at the living work of
the living force, because we are not in connection
with that, whatever we do, we go into problems,
but the nature does not, while we do.
The reason is we have lost our biological
sustainers, or process. We are not biologically
acting: it’s all dead action. What we do
is all dead. For example, as I told you before
also that something is dead, a tree is dead
and you make a chair, then you think, ‘I
have made this thing’. From dead to dead
to dead to dead, and this dead sits on our
head. You make a chair, you cannot sit on
the ground. Then we start another thing like
anti-culture business. That also just the
same. Like pendulum we may move. Now, we don’t
like democracy, to have communism. From communism
to democracy, democracy to communism, there’s
no movement!
Now what is the biological movement, within
us? As you know there are peptiles in our
body, and the biological movement of peptiles
is shown when the movement is spiral. When
it is spiral then it’s biological, and when
it is linear then it is said that they have
lost their biological sustainers. They have
no biological quality in them. They have become
linear. So that sustainers within us, that
spiral movement within us, is existing in
our nerves, but can become absolutely linear,
leading to death. All of our mental projections
are linear, because we cannot with that in
our own awareness, in our own awareness, jump
higher. It is so outside. For a man might
say, think: ‘Ah, I must try to improve the
whole world, I must do this thing’.
There was a gentleman I met who is in charge
of the peace of the world, and the most disturbed
personality I have ever come across, you see.
He was jumping this way, he was jumping this
way, every sort of disturbance was in his
mind, and he’s supposed to be in charge
of the peace of the world; imagine. Now what’s
the matter with the gentleman? Though he thinks
of peace, he thinks of such big things, he
talks of higher ideals, everything. What is
it inside? There is nothing, no peace. He’s
just talking outside. What is the reason?
The reason is it’s only linear. He has accepted
that he is in charge of the peace, he must
talk of big things, he must talk of ideal
things, and then the whole thing drops out.
We had League of Nations, now we have United
Nations: all flops. So to make it spirally
activated, what have we to do?
First of all we have to come to the right
conclusion, understanding, that whatever we
have done so far has been linear in its action.
It’s not biological. We cannot transform
a flower into a fruit. No living action we
can take. We cannot perform any living action.
Once we understand that, then we have to know
that we have to become more to be in connection
with that living force, that all-pervading
force. And to get to that all-pervading force,
what have we to do? Actually what did we do
to become human beings? Nothing. We just became,
spontaneously, Sahaja. Sahaj: spontaneously.
It was just some force within us which worked
it out, that made us human beings. We didn’t
do anything.
So one has to understand that if it is a living
process, then you don’t have to do anything
about it. It is effortless. This is very difficult
for human beings to understand. It is very
difficult, because they live with their ego,
and they cannot accept that you cannot do
it yourself. They think, ‘We can do it ourselves’,
which is not possible. You have to go to the
Mother Earth to ask the seed to be sprouted.
You cannot sprout it. You may try to dissect
it, analyze it, put it under microscope, but
you cannot sprout it. For sprouting, you have
to surrender yourself to that Mother Earth
who does the job. To begin with, we have to
understand that we are not capable of doing
any living work whatsoever. Once we have that
humility within us, then we start seeing what
can happen to us by which we can become the
masters of that living force.
To become something you have not done anything,
and to become higher you don’t have to do
anything. That means there is built in within
you the complete mechanism which is going
to work it out. Now before you I would say
it’s like a hypothesis for you and you have
to understand it as a scientist would understand;
with an open mind, because this is the science
of the Divine. It’s not known so far. This
is the knowledge of the roots, not known to
anyone so far, I can say, but to known to
some people who have evolved themselves. They
have gone above that state that is just mental,
and these are the very few people who know
what it is. This knowledge is not of today;
is of thousands of years, but, is not the
knowledge of the tree, as I told you, which
we have, but is the knowledge of the roots,
which we have to understand.
The knowledge of the roots is that within
you is placed the root, is called (Shri Mataji
speaks aside to the yogis present: ‘Is it
here? No, ah. Somebody can come up, please.’)
Here, in the triangular bone is placed the
thing called Kundalini. It is a Sanskrit word.
One should not be so frightened of Sanskrit.
I was surprised, when I went to America, the
first question they asked me: ‘Why should
you come and teach us about these things which
were in your country?’ I said: ‘To Me,
it is just the same whether it is America
or India. Why did you come to India to teach
us about science?’ Why this kind of an attitude
people have? Wherever there is knowledge,
a humble person must go and (see it/seek it?)
This was discovered about 14 000 years back,
where, in England, I don’t think people
lived here, in this country.
So why should anybody feel humiliated? When
you think you are English, or you are American,
you are wrong. You are a human being. God
never made a world like that. We are all one,
and everybody has to support each other. Like
a flower thinks, I am a flower, a leaf thinks,
I am a leaf, and the roots think they are
roots, then how the whole tree is going to
manifest, just think? We are one, there’s
nothing that you are the tree, and you are
the leaf, and you are the flower, and we are
everything. So to think like that if that
is another mental projection we have, that
‘I am this’ and ‘I am that’. You are
just a human being, which has been created
by God’s grace, to this level, as the most
beautiful thing, the epitome, of His creation.
I would say that, in the west, there are more
seekers, perhaps, than we have in the east,
perhaps, but that doesn’t mean that it is
only because it is England, or America, but
it is only that all over the world God has
this blessing and the message for everyone.
So first of all we must understand that this
is the knowledge of the roots, and this knowledge
of the roots, unless and until we know about
it, we have no right to criticize it. Moreover,
by criticizing you are not the gainer, you
are the loser. So with complete openness of
a student we have to see to this, that this
great force is placed within us, in a triangular
bone, whether you are an Australian, American,
English, Indian, or coming from Timbuctoo.
All of you, if you are human beings, God has
placed this force within you. He doesn’t
understand these differences, actually. It’s
only we do understand. For Him it’s the
one world, that beautiful world He has created,
and all the human beings are His children.
So in this triangular bone, is placed this
beautiful thing called the Kundalini, and
this Kundalini is the motherhood within you.
It’s a quality. It has nothing to do with
a woman or a man. It’s a quality, is a type,
a personality. For example, I would say today,
Mohatma Ghandi, people accept him as a great
man, because he had the quality of compassion.
He had the quality of giving, of nourishing.
In the same way all the saints of the world
had this quality. They were motherly, full
of compassion, love. Christ had the same.
He was so full of compassion that you cannot
call him, in the worldly way, a man, because
man means he must hate, he must aggress, he
must do all kinds of things to show his ego.
No. He was a personality who had compassion,
who had nourishment.
Now to become that personality, what have
we to do? Again, say I, nothing, because it
is all placed within you. The expression of
Kundalini within you is the expression of
that great personality. When that happens
to you, you yourself become like the Mother
Earth, that you can give, you can project
yourself, that you become compassion yourself
and your compassion acts. These days, Kali
Yuga is the modern times, what was the Kali
Yuga, the days of confusion, is over, and
is called as Krita Yuga, means where this
living force will act, and this living force
has to act through you. You become the medium
of that living force. Actually you become
the master of that. But the beauty of this
is that it manifests within you also.
For example, the electricity is flowing through
this; it doesn’t do anything to this instrument.
But when this force starts flowing through
you, you get completely transformed into a
new personality, and a personality that Christ
had described that you are to be born again.
Again, linear way, is that artificially people
can brand themselves ‘born again’. But
when it happens to you are completely transformed
from within, and the transformation is so
visible, and so active, as Krita Yuga has
started, that you are amazed. You cannot believe,
it is fantastic, because you are fantastically
made, extremely fantastically made, and that
all things starts expressing itself as soon
as it manifests. So a human being should know
that he’s made with great care, great love,
and for a very great thing: is to enjoy the
love of his Father.
When this Kundalini rises within you, passes
through six chakras - the seventh it does
not cross; the seventh is the guard – then
it creates that spiral movement within our
awareness. The awareness itself gets spirally
formed, and instead of moving in a pendulum
you move in such a way that you jump higher.
Your awareness becomes higher than what it
used to be. So the human awareness becomes
higher. There are lots of misunderstandings
about this, and it comes from the ignorance,
because when you start seeking something from
ignorance, what happens that whatever you
find, is a partial truth or could be something
not the truth. For example, in the darkness,
you might see this and think it’s a snake.
A wire might look like a snake to you. But
supposing you suddenly become enlightened.
Of course, in the beginning, light may not
be that strong. In some people it could be
little bit, just a flicker. But you start
seeing then, and gradually, if the light improves,
and the lantern improves, I can say, then
you start seeing it, very clearly, what has
gone wrong with you, and you start correcting
it.
Now the new awareness that comes into you
is not something that can be just certified
that, ‘Alright, now you are realized souls.
Have a brand and go ahead.’ It is not that
way. But you become conscious of that awareness,
because for the first time, when the Kundalini
pierces through this fontanelle bone area,
then you feel the cool breeze of the Holy
Ghost coming in. In the Sanskrit language,
Holy Ghost is called as Adi Shakti. Most surprising
is that, I don’t know why, but in the Bible,
Holy Ghost was not discussed much. Adi Shakti
is the Holy Ghost, and about Adi Shakti if
you have
to learn, you have to go to Indian Scriptures.
Even in the Old Testament they say Jews know
about it.
Now this power, which is the All-Pervading
power of God, the power of His Love, becomes
evident, because you start feeling it on your
fingers. And as you say in the English language,
you know, on your fingertips. Your hands start
speaking. You can feel another personality,
you can put the hand towards another person,
and you can see what are the centers catching,
because they are shown on this five, six and
seven on the right, five, six and seven on
the left. This is the emotional side, and
the right is the physical and the mental side.
Now the doctors cannot deal with the psychosomatic,
or psychological things, and it’s a very
big problem because there is only analysis
for you. Now, for a doctor it is important
to know both the sides of human beings, or
I would say the three sides: the physical,
the mental and the emotional. But it is not
so – he just knows part of it, while a psychologist
knows a part of it, and that’s how we cannot
find out the reason for the problems that
exist within us. But when this Kundalini rises,
She passes through these six centers which
are the milestones of our evolution, and thus
integrates you completely. So the first thing
you receive is the integration. By that integration
you are amazed that physically you get cured.
There has been a criticism about us in the
newspaper, that we have started curing people.
Thank God we are not in America; there we
would have been arrested, because the doctors
there do not allow anybody to cure anyone.
But we do not cure. Automatically it happens:
when the Kundalini will rise, automatically
it will happen that your whole being itself
will become integrated by which you will be
healed. You will heal yourself, nobody else
is going to heal you. I don’t (know?) under
law if you can charge a person if he heals
himself, but this will exactly happen that
you will heal yourself, and you will know
how to heal yourself. But this is nothing.
Is not only the physical side of it that happens
to you. Is just the minimum of minimums. But
those people who (are?) suffering from mental
trouble also get healed.
The third side of it is that physically you
are alright, mentally you are alright, and
emotionally also, you are alright. Now there’s
a very big confusion about mental and emotional
in English language. So if you have to say
‘mental’ as the brain is concerned, then
they mean to say that person who is mad is
a mental case. Actually he’s a heart case,
because he’s working with his heart. He
weeps, cries, but his head goes off, it’s
a balance. When he’s working with his head
too much, his heart goes off. That’s another
balance of the nature. So if you have even
the problem if you think too much, some people
are so mad that they go on thinking like mad,
they cannot stop their thinking, they think,
think, think, think, and they’re thinking
madness there, but they cannot stop it. So
here, when the Kundalini rises, onto this
point, you become thoughtlessly aware. You
don’t have to think; you can stop your thoughts.
If you want to think you can think, if you
want to stop, you can stop. It is not necessary
for you to think, and that’s exactly what
happens when the Kundalini rises here, that
mentally you become absolutely comfortable.
Now this business of raising the Kundalini
is a business of God, and which cannot be
sold. You cannot have a business on the human
level. You cannot sell it. You just cannot
do it. How it happens is automatically. By
the grace of God it works out. You cannot
sell anything that is the grace of God. What
is the value of that? On this point only many
people discard Sahaja Yoga because they think
that it cannot be sold so it must be useless.
It is so invaluable that you cannot pay for
it.
Now the rising of the Kundalini has to take
place, first of all. (Could possibly be missing
some lines here on the recording..) …the
Spirit. The Spirit is the one who is the master
in you. So you become your own master, you
become your own guru. Nobody has to tell you
‘do this’ or ‘do that’; you are guided,
because as soon as the Kundalini rises, you
start feeling the cool breeze in your hands.
And these are giving you a new vibrations,
a new dimension by which you know whether
to do this or not.
For example, you want to do something; you
want to buy a book. You don’t have to decide
about it: as soon as you go near the book
either it will give you cool breeze, or it
may make you hot, or it may little bit burn
also if it’s a horrid one, and you don’t
want to have that at any cost, you want to
have the cool breeze because you enjoy it.
So you just give up. You just give up things
without anybody telling you, because your
vibrations tell you. The spirit that has now
shine in your attention, tells you, and you
start understanding, that now I have become
my own guru, because your guru is sitting
inside you as the Spirit. It has not yet manifested
in your attention and that’s why you’re
worried. But just it manifests, and once it
manifests you are amazed, that you yourself
may have become a guru of yourself. You don’t
need anybody else to tell you, but you can
do it yourself. You can find out yourself.
Nobody has to give any explanation, or correction,
or anything, you just start improving yourself.
Automatically it works, and little bit, if
you know, how to decode it, and how to work
it out, your problems, you just manage it.
You become yourself a guru. That’s the thing
you have to be.
Of course I told you, you cannot pay for it.
It’s an insult even to think that you can
pay for it. Nobody can understand this; that
this is complete benevolence, is complete.
It’s not mercenary act of benevolence, but
it is a complete, absolute benevolence, and
for this benevolence you cannot pay. As soon
as you pay for it, it is no more of benevolence.
And that’s why you cannot pay for it. You
cannot work it out, it has to just work out.
Now, especially in the west, there is a problem
with people that they think, ‘Why should
Mother do it?’. I tell you, it’s a thankless
job. You cannot do it. If you can do it, I’ll
be happy to retire. But you cannot do it.
That’s the point (INAUDIBLE). This is my
job, what am I to do? Supposing I am that,
what am I to do now? If I have to do it, if
I am supposed to do it, then what should I
do? I mean supposing you are posted as something;
you are a policeman, you have to do the policeman’s
job. Now, how can you challenge it? He has
to do it. As if you can say, I’m paid for
it, or you can say that this is my job. This
I have to do, though I know it is very, very
troublesome. To get it done is not easy, it’s
not very easy. Everyone may not get realization,
I cannot guarantee that. I cannot say that
you all will get the realization, it’s a
very difficult thing. Some people will just
miss it for some time. There’s nothing to
be worried about it; it has to be corrected.
It has to be redeemed, as they say. The Kundalini
has to be brought up, if there are centers
catching they have to be cleared out, they
have to be brought up, and we have to have
complete understanding and compassion about
ourselves, and love for ourself and respect
for ourself. That if you have to become the
light, then we have to adjust and cooperate.
Now the thing is that the ego part of it is
the strongest enemy of realization. I. I like
it. I am this, I am that. When you say of
‘I, it is not yourself, your spirit, but
it is your ego that’s saying ‘I’. When
you become the spirit you don’t say ‘I’,
but you say ‘it’. You talk in the third
person. You say, ‘It is not coming up, it
is not working out, it is not’, in a third
way. You never say, ‘I will raise the Kundalini’.
What you will say: ‘the Kundalini is not
coming up. The Kundalini is not there.’
In a third person you start talking, so that
you do not take any credit or discredit for
it.
Now, it is for you to observe it and see for
yourself. It depends on your power of observation.
Whatever doctors may tell you, or anything,
you don’t have to believe those, because
it depends on your own observation and sense
of penetration.
Like I would say, I went to the Union Society
and the Chairman of the Union Society was
82-year-old man. And he got his realization.
And I told about Jung’s mistake why he missed
the point, which they understood very well.
But then he got up, very humbly, and he says,
‘Mother, now you have learned our language,
let us talk your language, let us learn your
language’. And then at the second meeting
he says, ‘Now I have observed - it’s not
a question, but my observation, if it is true
- that you don’t believe in time. There’s
no time.’ Just you give it like that. That
depends on your own observation. But I would
not like to accept any ideas about Me because
I know it is terrible; sometimes it can act
against. I mean, some people may just leave,
you know, they can’t bear it anymore. So
that’s not the point. You have to see for
yourself, observe yourself. There’s nothing
to gain from you, at all for Me, you cannot
give Me anything, whatever you may try. There’s
nothing to ask for. It is you who have to
take something from Me which you better have
it. I’m like a cashier on the bank, see?
You have got your cheques. Now, I have nothing
to get from you. The cashier is paid for,
alright, that’s one point, is different,
from the employer, but not by you. And what
I have to do is to take your cheques and cash
it. Now, when you are in that position, will
you be angry with me for that? Will you say
to your cashier, ‘Why are you doing this
to me? Why should I take money from you?’
If that is intelligible, then we can see there
is some meeting point between us, and we can
talk of realization then in a way that it
has to be done. You all have to have your
key, your spirit, that is within you. Perhaps
I know that better than you. You know many
things better than Me. I don’t know even
how to use a plastic bag, but I know how to
open the Kundalini. I am so hopelessly bad
at so many things which are so trivial and
simple which you can do just like that, I
cannot do it. So it’s alright, so, I am
also quite humble about it, I don’t mind.
I don’t know many things, but I know one
thing, is that you are the Spirit, and you
have to become the Spirit, through the awakening
of your Kundalini. This is what a Mother can
do, is to explain to you, that come to the
right conclusion, that you have to have it,
it is within you, and you have to get it.
But I cannot force it on you. I cannot make
you take it. Or else if you do not want to
have it I just can’t do it. It’s impossible.
There’s no (hypnosis?) in it. It’s a happening
that has to take place with complete understanding
of your freedom.
I hope you will understand this new method,
that if you have to go to the roots, you have
to become subtler than what you are, and to
become that subtler being, you have to become
the Spirit, your Kundalini has to be awakened.
Now, if you have any questions, you can ask
me, and there’s no need to be aggressive
with me, because I have not come here to take
anything from you. But if you have any questions
you can ask me. One thing I must tell you:
if you are going to some other guru, or something,
because I have seen also these people are
going to other gurus and I think these gurus
feel threatened because I don’t take any
money and they feel threatened about it, whatever
it is. If you are (registered/adjusted?) with
any guru or still attached to someone, you
may go away, because I am not here to quarrel
with you for that. You can go away; it’s
all your free choice. But if you want to become
the Spirit, if you want to have your realization,
you’re welcome; I’ll be very happy to
work it out. Now, let me have some questions
if you have. Yes?
(Inaudible question from audience. Yogi: What
happens to your self-realization when the
body dies? What happens to your Kundalini
and Spirit?)
That is again futuristic. You be in the present,
my child, alright? Now this is a very futuristic
question. Now you’re not going to die, I
can assure you, for some time. So we’ll
do it later on. Because why should you worry
about your death just now? I am talking of
eternal life. Let’s (take?) it, be in the
present, alright? It’s a good question,
but why should you worry about death? (Inaudible
discussion in the audience. Yogi: Just, Mother’s
given you the answer. Just leave it.) I have
given you the answer. This is not the time
to talk about it, it requires a complete lecture,
alright? I’ll tell you later on. I’ll
write to you. You give me your address, I’ll
write to you. (Further inaudible discussion
in the audience. Yogi: Next question, please.)
Now don’t take others’ time, because I’m
not interested, now. Don’t be interested
what happens to your death, and what happens.
That is not to be seen just now. Just now
you get your realization; the first step.
That’s why Bhudda did not talk of God, even,
because he thought, he talks of God then people
ask, ‘What is God? Where is He? Well, can
I see Him? Can I meet Him?’. So he said,
alright. Just take your self-realization,
finished. Nothing more than that. (Further
inaudible discussion in audience.) No, no,
no, please sit down. You are from some other
group, I think. Do you belong to some other
group? (Inaudible response from audience).
I know, I know that. No, please sit down.
We don’t want you here. Please sit down.
Now this is not the way to behave. We don’t
go to your group, why don’t you take your
own hall and give a lecture there? If you
belong to another group you don’t come here.
These people have been always troubling us
like this. This is too much. Why are you troubling
us? What have we done to you? Why do you come
here and trouble us? (Inaudible response from
audience.) No, that’s not good, that’s
not being kind, and civil. You better learn
these things, first of all. Please sit down.
Please sit down. This is not the way to behave,
to go to somebody’s groups and, you see,
I don’t go to these people, I don’t talk
about these people, why should you go to other
peoples’? Go and learn from your guru and
become whatever you want to become, it’s
alright. I’ve already told you, we shouldn’t
trouble somebody like this all the time. It’s
not good. That’s why realization is needed;
then you’ll understand how to be gentle.
They give big ideas; you become mokshas, you
become this, you have become this, and you,
you go with those ideas. You don’t even
have vibrations to feel what you are; what
your guru is. You don’t have any understanding,
no discretion; nothing. You go to a guru and
he says, ‘Alright. Now you, you are going
to go beyond everything’. You believe it.
This is all ego pampering. If you want to
live with it, go ahead. (Further inaudible
discussion from audience.) You believe into
whatever you believe it in your own way, but
whatever you believe has done no good to anyone.
Has it done any good to anyone? You may believe
into anything, so what? It’s not important.
What have you done so far? What good have
you done to anyone so far? (Further inaudible
discussion from audience.) What’s he saying?
(Yogi: Let’s leave it, please.) No, don’t
do like that. (Yogi: Next question.) It’s
not good. It’s not civil. No, no, no, no,
no, no. You better join some politics, you’ll
be better there. (Audience laughter.) You
are not meant for spiritual life. You go into
some politics; you’ll be better off. Now,
let us have some other questions.
(Yogi: If there are no questions, those few
people who want…) These are stupid people
wasting their time, I tell you, really, wasting
their time, wasting our time. Done no good
to anyone…
(Inaudible question from audience. Yogi: If
he gets self-realization, will it interfere
in any way with his normal functioning?)
No, no, you will be very normal. (Shri Mataji
and audience laughter.) You become extremely
normal. You become so normal that you are
amazed at yourself. You see, all abnormalities
drop out, first of all. And secondly, you
become so dynamic, absolutely dynamic. We
have people here who couldn’t do any jobs,
or they were depressed, this, that, but apart
from that when they started doing jobs they
were surprised. The students who could not
pass their exams took first in the class,
they had the highest marks. The people who
could not concentrate become well-known artists,
well-known architects. We have so many Indian
artists in India, especially, who are very
well-known artists but they had fallen prey
to, say, alcohol, or something, they have
become great artists and now when they sing,
you see, it’s so melodious, they themselves
now feel it that way. And on my birthday they
came to sing, because they said, ‘Mother,
You have given us this new dimension in our
music’. You become extremely creative, and
very dynamic, and you are not tired, because
you get connected with the whole.
(Yogi: Yes. Inaudible question from audience.
Shri Mataji chuckles as She listens.) Thank
you. (Further inaudible discussion from the
same questioner, a doctor.) Yes, doctor, I’m
sorry to say it is so. It’s so many diseases
can be cured, so many. I would not say all
I would cover, like supposing you have a cata,
catarac, in the eye, and we cannot cure that,
we have seen that. And also, things where
something is dead in the body, then you have
to remove it, you see, and things like that.
But I think if it is
not in a very galloping state, if it is still
there and if you do not interfere too much
with it, and do proper meditation the way
it is to be done, you see these are only permutations
and combinations of these centers that we
get into trouble. If you are in the center,
you see, if you are in the center, I mean,
no less than Guru Nanak, Himself, has talked
about it, absolutely, and this is what work
He has done. I’m doing His work, only, only
thing is that today is the time for, to give
you the proof of what he said. So if these
centers are kept normal, and if the Kundalini
starts flowing properly, then what happens
is that you get connected with that all-pervading
power which is the life force itself. It’s
not only Prana. It’s not only the right-sided
thing which we call the Prana, the white thing
is, but also the emotional, and also the evolutionary
process, the sustenance. So it gives all the
three forces within us and if you know how
to manipulate it and manifest it, you can
work it out. And for you, especially, I would
say, that it is your heritage, itself, so
for you it should be a great thing to understand
it. But of course the patients who are absolutely
gone cases, and some patients, I would say,
I must admit this, like Hitler, now, Hitler
I wouldn’t be able to cure, I’m sorry,
because you must have some catch there also,
isn’t it?, with God. If you ask Me to cure
Hitler or somebody like that, it’s going
to be difficult. But, people are normally
good people, and those who are good people,
who lead a righteous life, not an aggressive
life, and are of good nature, can be easily
cured.
Once it happened that there was one doctor
Daetey; he brought Me a lady to be cured of
her heart ailment, and she was very serious,
and he thought he, she, she may not be alright
with Sahaja Yoga. But I cured her, but I told
him that this lady would not survive, within
three days she is going to die. She was so
much cured that he could not believe, because
every heartbeat was alright, everything was
alright. He was surprised: I was saying that
she is going to die after three days. So he
said, ‘How do you know, Mother?’. I said
‘I don’t know how do I know but I know
she is going to die’. Then I told him, ‘Doctor,
you go and find out the history of this woman,
what sort of a woman she is, so then you will
know what I am saying. And he found out that
she’s the woman because of her, her daughter-in-law
committed suicide, and her husband had become
really mad; an extremely aggressive woman
and she has tortured all
the people in the family. She had no love
at all, and there was no need for her to be
blessed to that extent that she should get
completely cured. Perhaps, I think her life
was cut short was good, and that’s how she
could not survive, after that, and she died
really after three days. And the doctor Daetey
was himself surprised. I told him himself,
that, ‘You will get a heart attack too,
if you don’t take to Sahaja Yoga’, and
he died of heart, because his heart was catching,
he wouldn’t believe, because he said, ‘It’s
showing alright, my x-ray’s alright’.
I said, ‘It is not’.
It is such a subtle thing. Before the disease
starts, you see, you cannot make out, but
the disease starts at a point, when it is
so subtle, that doctors also cannot make it
out. But in Sahaja Yoga you can. You catch
on this finger. If you catch on this finger,
that means there’s some pressure on your
heart. And if you’re catching on this finger
it’s better to pay attention to your heart
immediately, and
you carry the very simple thing, very simple,
the mantra for heart attack is: ‘Mother
I am the Spirit’. Just (say/do) it. ‘Mother
I am the Spirit’. (Hindi translation), that’s
all. If you say it three times you can get
rid of it. But, this mantra has to be siddh.
Every Dick, Tom and Harry cannot give you
the mantra. Any person who is a realized soul
can only give you that. That is one thing
very important. And Nanaka himself always
talked about Satguru, you see, because he
found out that people used to talk about guru
like Swami Ramdass and all those talk of guru.
But then he thought that it’s better to
call Satguru and guru as two things. Satguru
is the one who has got realization, and the
one who calls himself as guru without realization
talks big, ‘I, you, I’ll give you this
and I’ll give you that’, and just makes
a big organization out of that, is not a guru.
So that is what it is, a person has to be
a realized soul, and he must know all the
details about how to do it.
Now, as if you are interested, I would like
to meet some of you doctors here, and I tell
you all about it, details, and I can make
you master in no time, there’s no problem.
But a Sahaja Yogi is a person who knows all
about Kundalini, he knows how to deal with
it, how to work it out. Now he himself is
a doctor, and he has cured many people with
Sahaja Yoga, and is a very simple thing, and
which can work out. Thank God this country
is a free country in this respect, and that
they have asked us to write to them about
this method of Sahaja Yoga; how we cure people.
But that’s just the basics. That’s not
so important. What is important is to become
the spirit.
(Inaudible question from same audience member.)
Yes, by all means. Why not? I would love to
have you for tea at my residence. You give
your name and address and I’ll, I’ll let
you know. I thank you very much. Thank you
very much doctor. Yes.
(Yogi: Any more? Yes.) (Inaudible question
from audience member.) What did he say? (Yogi:
Sorry, could you say again? Ah. And you’re
asking will it help.) Yes. (Yogi: His son
has been very depressed.) Where do you live,
in what part? (Inaudible response from audience
member.) Alright. It’s not difficult; we
have a center here. (Inaudible discussion
from the man. Yogi: So, medication doesn’t
help, is that what you’re saying?…) (Inaudible
response.) (Yogi: Ah. No medication is required
at the moment but they as parents are very
worried about him.) No, I know, depression
is also to be understood in its full, full
extent. How people get depressed, you see?
And how people get into problems on depression.
It’s very simple and it can be cured. He
can be cured. We have people here who were
very depressed and now today they have become
dynamic people, so it’s alright. You can,
you can go to the center, you take the address
of the center, and you, you take the photograph,
and they, we’ll manage. You just don’t
worry, they’ll tell you how to do it, but
do it religiously. The way they are telling
you if you do it. It’s very simple methods,
they will tell you; you have to have faith
in yourself and you have to do it religiously,
it will work out. I promise it can be worked
out. Now, behind you is sitting there some
Mohan, is sitting, just see that boy, sitting
behind you, and he had been to some guru like
that, who just ruined his awareness completely.
He was really, absolutely, out of mind. And
now you won’t believe, he writes poetry
so beautifully, like, when I read it I think
of Kabir, like that. He’s writing poetry
now. So it’s something so different, you
know? So, it can happen. You just bring the,
you take the address and bring the photograph
of the boy, with his birth date and all that
and give it to them, we’ll work it out.
(Inaudible comment from man.) He’s an artist?
Then it’s alright. He’ll become a greater
artist. (Laugher from audience.)
(Yogi: Yes? Audience member: Asking about
special diet, the difficulty of meditation)
It was not hard at all! (Shri Mataji laughs.)
(Audience member: Laughs. It wasn’t hard!
…INAUDIBLE…) No, no, no. You see, it is
Sahaja Samadhi. It is Sahaja. Sahaja has another
meaning also; easy. That’s the quality of
your mother, I should say, has to be (easier/easiest?).
Mother gives you birth, does she give you
any trouble? Nothing. She takes all the trouble,
so you don’t have to worry. Kundalini takes
all the trouble within you, you don’t have
to do anything. So it’s very Sahaj, is absolutely
Sahaj. It is absolutely spontaneous. It doesn’t
give you trouble at all. It is absolutely
easy, easy as possible. Has to be, because
it is so vital. Whatever is not vital is like
this, that guru says, ‘Don’t eat this,
don’t do that, stand on your heads, do this,
do that’. That’s not the mother’s style.
But the real gurus, also, they’re very strict,
no doubt, but the real gurus give you realization.
That’s the first thing they do. They don’t
tell you that, ‘I’ll take you to mokshas,
I’ll do this’, nothing of these big talks.
They say that, ‘First of all you get your
realization’.
Any other question, please. (Inaudible question
from audience member and general laughter.
Yogi: Can you give some evidence of Your own
enlightenment? Shri Mataji laughs, more audience
laughter.) What evidence you want? What evidence
you understand? You see, the evidence is if
your Kundalini is awakened, then only you
will understand. What Christ could not give
evidence (so/to?) you crucified him nicely.
But I am going to give you the evidence, you
the evidence. I will give you. You sit down,
you get your realization, then you’ll get
the evidence, alright? Once you get your realization
you’ll get the evidence, isn’t it? What
is the evidence that the candle is enlightened?
That it when you take it near an unlit, unlit…supposing
this is an enlightened candle, the evidence
is that it can enlighten another candle, isn’t
it? That is the evidence. Now you sit down,
first you, let’s see if you get realization.
That’s the evidence, alright? If you don’t
get the realization, then the evidence is
that something wrong with you, because many
will get it. It’s you who has to give Me
the evidence, not Me, because I don’t have,
you see, these questions are alright for a
person who’s taking money from you, or taking
anything from you, or I’m telling you anything,
nothing, I’m just saying, you take it. These
questions are just other way around, should
be, isn’t it? It is you who has to give
the evidence that you have got it, not Me.
Here at least there are 60% people who have
got it. 60% people. So if you get it, thank
your stars that you’ve got it. If you don’t
get it I’ll have to work hard with you.
(Yogi: Why don’t we all ask for it now.
Just slip your shoes off, and put your hands
on your lap, put your hands out, and ask for
it. Ask for it in your heart, that is.) I
think all of you should get seated down, first
of all, properly. You see? There should be
no (INAUDIBLE). Please be seated. There are
some seats here. Come along. There are some
seats here, also.
There’s one thing I have to tell you, that
it is something that happens within yourself,
and it is a very quick thing; it’s the split
of a second, when the Kundalini rises, just
split of a second. But, if there is any obstruction,
then it takes some time, and I have seen,
that say, in an Indian village, I have seen
6000 people just get realization in the split
of a second, but, the more we get sophisticated
and modernized, we get complicated. So, we
have to, little bit, give some energy to our
different centers, and try to nourish it,
so that the Kundalini is moving faster, without
any obstruction. To remove the obstruction,
we have to work it out in a very simple way,
which I’ll tell you, that left hand you
have to put like this, which is the power
of desire. So put the left hand like this.
All these things I cannot explain in one,
one lecture, and it’s too much, also, like
I would say that if you had to switch on then
you just pull the switch and the lights will
be on. In the same way we can say put this
left hand straight like this, just like this,
on your lap, very comfortably, and with the
right hand, I will say where to go.
Now first of all, you must close your eyes,
and don’t open your eyes till I tell you.
Take out your spectacles if possible, and…
it’s already going to deep I can’t keep
my eyes open… now put the left hand towards
Me and with the right hand you have to move,
so keep your eyes shut and also, if you can
take out your spectacles it’s better because
you don’t have to see anything. Better,
it’s good for the eyesight. So better take
out your spectacles, and be comfortable. There
should be nothing tight anywhere in the body,
anywhere.
Now, what you put your left hand towards Me,
and with the right hand, right hand, you put
it on your heart on the left-hand side, to
begin with. It’s very important. Now, on
the heart, we are putting it, first of all,
because we have to say that ‘Mother, I am
the Spirit’. You can address Me as Shri
Mataji, as Mother, whatever. If it is easier
for you to say Shri Mataji, is alright, otherwise
to make it easier you can call Me Mother.
I am the Spirit. Everyone should try. Everyone
should try. Or you can ask a question: ‘Am
I the Spirit?’.
Now, slowly take this side down on the left-hand
side of your stomach, left-hand side of your
stomach, and press it hard. Left-hand side
of your stomach. Don’t open your eyes. Put
this right hand on the left-hand side of your
stomach, because there resides the principle
of the Primordial master, of your mastery.
So here, you have to say, ten times, because
you have ten valencies. As human beings we
have ten valencies, so we have to say ten
times: ‘Mother, I am my own master. I am
my own guru’, to awaken within you the Primordial
master. ‘I am my own guide.’ With full
confidence. Without any guilt, without any
guilt. Without any guilt you have to say,
‘I’m my own master’. This is one of
the diseases in the west; to feel guilty.
At the present moment, your past is not there.
You just worry, don’t worry about your past.
You just say, ‘Mother, I am my own master’
with full confidence. Don’t feel guilty.
(Long pause.) Please don’t feel guilty throughout.
Please don’t feel guilty at all. And don’t
count your sins but count your blessings.
Now raise this right hand, again, back to
the heart, with complete love and understanding
about yourself, and full respect, because
you are at the epitome of the evolution. You
must respect yourself. At this point, you
have to say 12 times, ‘Mother I am the Spirit’,
because at this chakras, there are twelve
sub-chakras, that’s why it is to be said
12 times, or petals, sub-petals as they call
it. Mother, I am the Spirit. Just say that.
You are the Spirit, believe Me, you are. Just
say that. (Long pause. Yogi tells Mother that
he and/or the other yogis present feel left
vishuddi.) Now don’t feel guilty at that
time. Don’t weep, or cry, don’t feel bad.
Just say, ‘Mother, I am not guilty, I am
the Spirit’, with full confidence, you are.
Don’t feel guilty. This feeling guilty causes
angina, one part of it, I tell you. Now, with
that fear at least you’ll stop feeling guilty.
(Shri Mataji chuckles. She says to yogis),
Hmm, better.
Now put that right hand on the base of your
neck on the left-hand side, from the front.
From the front. On the base, on the left-hand
side. Base of your neck on the left-hand side,
take your hand in front, not from the back.
Now press it hard, a little. Now this is the
point, which catches very badly, when you
feel guilty. Now, just say, ‘Mother, I am
not guilty’, 16 times. But I always say
that if you have too much of this fashion,
of feeling guilty, then you may punish yourself
by saying 35 times, or 108 times. Just laugh
at yourself for feeling guilty; that’s the
best way. Do not condemn yourself. Say it
16 times. (Long pause.) Still you are feeling
guilty.
Now, put this hand on your forehead across,
without feeling guilty again. Throughout I
have to say this because that’s the main
thing you’re catching, all the time, and
at this point you have to say, ‘Mother,
I forgive everyone’. Just say that. Now,
somebody would say that it’s very difficult
to forgive, and all that. It is all a myth.
When you don’t forgive anyone, what do you
do? Nothing. You are actually cursing yourself,
and torturing yourself. So I forgive everyone.
Mother, I forgive everyone. Forgive everyone.
(Shri Mataji says mantras quietly.)
Now put this hand at the back, on the backside
of your head, and pull it out a little bit.
Press it a little bit. Now at this point,
without feeling guilty, again I say without
feeling guilty, at all, just to say, that,
‘Oh Lord, Oh God, if we have done any mistake,
please forgive us’. But don’t feel guilty.
(Pause.) At the back, just at the back of
your head. (Longer pause as Mother speaks
quietly aside to the yogi/yogis.)
Now, put this hand on top of your head, and
press it, on the fontanelle bone area, where
you had a soft bone in your childhood, and
just press it, and rub it a little bit, and
at this point as I said, I cannot cross your
freedom. You have to ask for it. You have
to say, ‘Mother, I want my realization,
give me my realization’. Say it seven times
here. Ask for it. You have to ask for it.
You must know that the Divine is not going
to fall at your feet. You have to humble down,
and ask for it, otherwise it will not work
out. (Pause; Mother speaks again, quietly,
to yogis.)
Now raise your hand, and see if there’s
a cool breeze coming in. Just not much, about
five inches, six inches higher, on top of
your head. Now put down right hand, on your
lap. Don’t open your eyes, please. Keep
quiet.
END
…tape cuts off here…